[♪♪♪]
YEAH, "LOWBROW" IS, YOU KNOW,
SOMETHING... SOMEBODY USEDFOR LACK OF A BETTER TERM.
ART THAT, OH...
NOBODY ELSE KNOWSHOW TO CATEGORIZE.
YEAH, WELL, I MEAN,YOU GET EMAILS ALL THE TIME,
PORNO SITES THAT SAY "LOWBROW."
SO I WOULD NEVER CALL MYSELFA LOWBROW ARTIST, NO.
WHAT I DO, I DO,
AND I DON'T LIKETO LABEL THINGS, REALLY.
IT'S ESSENTIALLY REACTIONARYAGAINST HIGHBROW CULTURE,
SO THAT'S WHERE "LOWBROW"COMES FROM,
THE IDEA IS
WE DON'T WANT ANYTHING TO DOWITH COLOUR-FIELD CANVASES,
URINALS IN GALLERIESAND THINGS LIKE THAT,
AND THAT KIND OF SNOTTY ATTITUDE
DIDN'T MAKE PEOPLEWHO CALL THEMSELVES LOWBROW
WELCOME IN THE UPPER ECHELONSOF THE ART WORLD.
I MEAN BASICALLY
YOU'RE THUMBING YOUR NOSEAT PEOPLE,
AND THEN YOU CAN'T EXPECT THEMTO INVITE YOU IN FOR DINNER.
SOME CARTOONIST HAD DRAWN
THE ARCHETYPAL HIGHBROW PERSON,MIDDLEBROW, AND LOWBROW,
AND LOWBROW WAS KIND OF LIKEYOU HAD TO SAY
OKAY, THIS MUST HAVE BEENTHE CRO-MAGNONS OR SOMETHING,
YOU KNOW, THE LOWBROWS.
IT'S A CATCHALL PHRASE OF A WORDTHAT'S ALREADY OUT THERE,
SO IT HAS CONNOTATIONS
BEFORE IT WAS APPLIEDTO ARTWORK.
A LOT OF PEOPLE DON'T LIKE THAT
BECAUSE THEY DON'T LIKETHOSE CONNOTATIONS.
[PRESSMAN]:INITIALLY, IT WAS USED
IN RELATIONTO A LOT OF THE PAINTINGS
HAVING NAKED GIRLS IN THEMAND HOT RODS,
AND LOWBROW TYPE OF IMAGERY.
THE FACT THAT THE NAMEJUST CAUGHT ON AND STUCK
I THINK IT'S EVOLVEDINTO A MEANING OF ITS OWN.
I ORIGINATED A TERM,AND I DON'T LIKE IT.
I'VE GOT SEVEN BOOKS OUT,
AND MY FIRST BOOK WAS CALLED
THE LOWBROW ARTOF ROBT. WILLIAMS,
AND IT COME OUT IN 1979.
THAT'S WHERETHAT TERM COME FROM.
[PRESSMAN]: I THINKA MORE APPROPRIATE TERM
WOULD BE LOWBROW SURREALISM,
AND LIKE I SAY AGAIN, "LOWBROW"WOULD HAVE A MEANING OF ITS OWN.
IT'S KIND OF EVOLVEDINTO A MEANING OF ITS OWN,
AND IT DOESN'T REALLYPARTICULARLY MEAN
WHAT IT MEANT ORIGINALLY,
WHICH WAS, LIKE I SAY,PORNOGRAPHY.
MY PARTNER, GREG ESCALANTE,
HE STARTED CALLING IT "NEWBROW"FOR THAT VERY REASON,
AND I LIKE THAT TERM.
[SIGH]
MAYBE "NOBROW."
I LIKE "LOWBROW" JUST BECAUSEIT'S PRETTY TO THE POINT.
I'M NOT THAT KEENON "POP SURREALISM,"
BECAUSE TO ME SURREALISMWAS A SPECIFIC ART MOVEMENT.
SURREALISM WAS A MANIFESTO, SEE,
IT WAS A STRICT MANIFESTO,
AND THEY THROW YOUR ASSOUT OF SURREALISM IF...
THEY HAD MOCK TRIALS.
[SHAG]: TO ME, A LOT OF, LIKE,LOWBROW ART IS NOT SURREAL.
I MEAN, WHAT SURREAL ARTREALLY WAS,
I DON'T THINK LOWBROW ARTIS THAT SAME THING,
SO THAT'S WHY I PREFERTHE TERM "LOWBROW."
[THE PIZZ]: NO, IT REALLYDOESN'T HAVE ANYTHING
TO DO WITH LOWBROW.
YOU LET'S SAY GET AN ARTISTLIKE ISABEL SAMARAS,
WHO IS A VERY FINE OIL PAINTERTRADITIONALLY,
AND THE ONLY THING LOWBROWABOUT IT
IS SHE'S USINGTV SHOW CHARACTERS.
IT'S LIKE OH, WELL,IF YOU GUYS ARE HIGHBROW
AND WE'RE NOT ALLOWEDTO PLAY IN YOUR SANDBOX,
THEN WE'LL MAKE OUR OWN SANDBOX,
AND OURS IS GOING TO BEALL-INCLUSIVE.
ANYBODY CAN PLAY.
IT SEEMS TO BE ABOUT,LIKE, HEART.
IF YOU'VE GOT ENOUGH,YOU KNOW, THE HEART OR THE BALLS
OR THE ENERGY OR THE INTERESTTO DO SOMETHING,
THEN IT SEEMSTO DRAW AN ATTRACTION,
AND EVERYBODY SEEMS WILLINGTO LOOK AT IT AND ENJOY IT.
MUCH MORE OF A POPULIST THING.
IT'S MOREOF A PEOPLE THING.
THERE'S NOT SO MUCHOF AN EMPEROR'S NEW CLOTHES
WHERE SOMEONE'S TRYING TO SAY
"THIS ITEMIS UNBELIEVABLY GREAT,"
AS THE MORE ESTABLISHEDGALLERY ROUTINE WOULD GO.
[12 MIDNITE]:IT'S THE LIFESTYLE,
IT'S THE PEOPLE,IT IS A SOCIAL SCENE.
IN A DIFFERENT TIMEOR A DIFFERENT PLACE,
WE MIGHT BE MEMBERS OF,
I DON'T KNOW, THE SHRINERS,RIGHT?
WHO KNOWS.
WHAT MAKES US A GROUP OR A SCENE
IS WE HAVE A COMMON LOVEOR A COMMON EXPERIENCE
THAT MAKES US WANT TONOT ONLY BE PART OF IT,
BUT ADD TO IT.
IT REALLY REACHES OUTTO THE MASSES,
AND PEOPLE, LIKE, CAN RELATE
TO THE IMAGERYTHAT THEY'RE SEEING,
YOU KNOW, WHETHER IT BE,YOU KNOW, CAR CULTURE
OR, YOU KNOW, POPULAR CULTUREAND PINUP
AND ALL THAT OTHER STUFF.
I MEAN, THERE IS A HISTORICALREFERENCE THERE
THAT I THINK IS MORE PERSONAL
THAN SOMETHINGTHAT'S MORE ESOTERIC.
[SHIRE]:TO A CERTAIN EXTENT,IT HAS, YOU KNOW,
A HISTORY IN FOLK ART.
YOU CAN GO BACKTO SCRIMSHAW AND TATTOOING.
COMING FROM WORLD WAR II
WITH THE AIRPLANES THAT WEREPAINTED WITH THE WOMEN ON THEM,
THE SORT OF PIN-UP STYLETHAT CAME INTO THE STREETS
AND FILTERED INTHROUGH THE HOT-ROD CULTURE.
A LOT OF THE MECHANICSAND CAR-BUILDERS
SEEMED TO BECOME ARTISTSFROM THAT.
OF COURSE, VON DUTCHAND ROBERT WILLIAMS AND ED ROTH
IN THE '60s AND '70s,
BRINGING IN A LOT OF THE FAME,I GUESS,
TO THE LOWBROW ART MOVEMENTAND MAKING IT SOMETHING.
[♪♪♪]
I'M DEFINITELY CONSUMEDBY POP CULTURE REFERENCES,
ESPECIALLY IF THE REFERENCESGO BACK TO MY CHILDHOOD.
THAT'S WHERE THINGSLIKE DR. ZAIUS MIGHT COME FROM.
SOMETHING ELSE, LIKE THE BULL,
YOU KNOW, THAT'S SORT OFA PICASSO THING.
I SEE IT AS GOING BACK TO THAT.
UM, AND YOU'LL SEE A LOT OF TOYSAND ARTWORK IN MY PAINTING.
A LOT OF ITIS STUFF I OWN MYSELF
OR STUFF THAT I'D LIKE TO OWN,
SO, YOU KNOW,
IT KIND OF COMES FULL CIRCLETO THE CONSUMERISM THING.
[12 MIDNITE]:I THINK WE ALL LOOK BACK
ON THE '40s, THE '50s,
EVEN THE '60s, EVEN THE '70s NOW
AS A MORE INTERESTINGAESTHETIC TIME TO LIVE IN.
ONE THING THAT IS ALSO GENERALLYVERY IMPORTANT
WITH THIS SCHOOL OF ART
IS THE POST WORLD WAR II PERIOD
WHICH IS CALLED THE ATOMIC AGEOR THE SPACE AGE.
SAY, FROM THE LATE '40s,EARLY '50s
UP THROUGH THE MID '60s,
YOU ALSO HAD A LOT OF B MOVIESTHAT WERE VERY INFLUENTIAL
AND COMIC BOOKS
AND ALSO THE McCARTHYISMTHAT WAS GOING ON,
YOU KNOW, PEOPLE WEREVERY PARANOID OF THIS COLD WAR.
WORLD WAR II IS OVER,AMERICA WAS PROSPERING,
BUT PEOPLE WEREBUILDING BOMB SHELTERS STILL
IN THEIR HOUSE,
AND THEY WERE VERY AFRAIDOF BEING NUKED.
THAT WAS SOMETHING
THAT WAS LINGERINGOVER OUR SHOULDER.
McCARTHYISM WAS VERY EAGERTO POINT FINGERS
AT ANYBODYTHAT DEVIATED FROM THE NORM
AND ANYBODY THAT DEVIATEDFROM THE NORM,
OF COURSE, WAS A COMMIE,
AND THAT WAS BAD STUFF.
ALSO AT THIS SAME TIME,
YOU HAD THIS AMERICANCONSUMER CULTURE DEVELOPING,
ESPECIALLYIN SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA
WITH THE AUTOMOBILEBACK IN PRODUCTION
AFTER THE WAR,
THE FREEWAY SYSTEMOF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA,
DISNEYLAND OPENED ITS DOORSIN 1955,
THESE WERE ALLVERY IMPORTANT IMAGES.
YOU ALSO HAD SURF MOVIESCOMING ON STRONG
THAT HAD ANNETTE FUNICELLOAND THE MALIBU BEACH SCENE HERE,
YOU HAD THE 2.2 KIDS,AMERICAN FAMILY EMERGING,
SUBURBIA,
ALL THESE THINGS
KIND OF WENT INTOBEING THE INSPIRATION
FOR THIS TYPE OF ART.
[AUSGANG]: "ART" IS THIS WORD
THAT COVERSSO MANY DIFFERENT THINGS
FROM CONCEPT ART,
WHICH IS SOMEBODY WHO DECIDES
THEY'RE GOING TO SITON A STREET CORNER FOR FIVE DAYS
AND CALL THAT, YOU KNOW,THEIR PIECE OF ART,
TO PAINTINGS AND SCULPTURESAND SO FORTH,
SO YEAH, WE NEEDTO HAVE CATEGORIES
AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
THAT'S THE JOB OF THE CRITICS.
AS AN ARTIST,OUR JOB IS JUST TO MAKE THE ART,
AND LET SOMEBODY ELSE ANALYZE ITAND FIGURE OUT WHAT'S GOING ON.
THESE TERMINOLOGIES,
I DON'T KNOW HOW TO HELP YOUWITH THESE THINGS,
BECAUSE WE HAVEN'T HADOUR ANDRE BRETON TO COME IN HERE
AND WRITE THE MANIFESTOES, SEE?
SOMEWHERE DOWN THE LINE
THERE'S GOING TO BE SOMEINTELLIGENT WRITERS
THAT CAN FUSE ALL THIS TOGETHER,
BUT IT DOESN'T SEEMLIKE THAT'S RIGHT NOW.
[PRESSMAN]: ROBERT, YOU KNOW,
HAS BEEN AROUNDLONGER THAN ANYBODY.
HE STARTED WITH ZAP COMICS
AND HANGING OUTWITH BIG DADDY ROTH
AND VON DUTCH
AND ALL THE PEOPLEIN THE KUSTOM KULTURE MOVEMENT.
I ACTUALLY WENT TO A SHOW IN,LIKE, 1981
AND SAW A DISPLAYOF HIS PAINTINGS.
YOU KNOW, NO ONE ELSEWAS DOING ANYTHING LIKE THAT.
THAT'S GROUND ZERO,THE EARLY '80s,
AND THAT WAS REALLYTHE ONLY THING AT ALL
HAPPENING AT THAT TIME.
I DON'T THINKTHERE WAS ANYBODY ELSE
DOING ANYTHING CLOSETO THAT QUALITY.
[♪♪♪]
[WILLIAMS]: REPRESENTATIONAL ART
HAS BEEN DEAD FOR ABOUT 50 YEARSNOW IN ART SCHOOLS.
IT'S JUST OUTRE, YOU SEE?
START AT ART SCHOOL.
I TRIED TO UTILIZE MY INTERESTS
IN THE GRAPHICSTHAT I WAS ATTRACTED TO,
PULP MAGAZINES AND COMIC BOOKSAND LURID MATERIAL,
B MOVIE POSTERS,
AND THINGS LIKE THAT,
STUFF THAT JUSTREALLY EXCITED ME,
AND SO WHEN I STARTEDINTO THE ARTS,
I THOUGHT I COULD BRING
THAT ROMANCE AND ZEITGEISTWITH ME.
WELL, I WAS INFOR A BIG SURPRISE,
BECAUSE IN THE LATE '50sAND EARLY '60s,
THE DOMINATING ART FORMWAS ABSTRACT EXPRESSIONISM,
AND IT DOMINATED ABSOLUTELY.
I WAS IN AN ART LECTUREONE TIME
AND THE TEACHER WAS SHOWINGA SLIDE SHOW,
AND HE HADA BIG PROJECTION THERE
OF RUBENS' PAINTING,CHRIST DESCENDING THE CROSS,
AND HE SAID"THIS IS NOT A PAINTING.
THIS IS A COLOURED-IN DRAWING,"
AND I KNEW I WAS IN TROUBLERIGHT THERE.
I KNEW I WAS IN DEEP DOO-DOORIGHT THERE
WHEN THAT STATEMENT WAS MADE.
[NASON]: IT'S INTERESTING
THAT A LOT OF THE CLASSIFICATIONBETWEEN,
SAY, A FINE ARTISTAND SOMETHING ELSE,
SAY, A GRAPHIC ARTISTOR, SAY, A COMMERCIAL ARTIST,
THAT THERE WAS SUCHA DISTINCTION GOING ON
BEFORE THE '60s.
ONE OF MY FAVOURITE ARTISTSIS EDGAR LEETEG
THAT STARTED PAINTING ON VELVETIN TAHITI IN THE LATE 1940s,
AND HIS BACKGROUND,HE WAS A SIGN PAINTER.
BIG DADDY ROTHWAS A FANTASTIC SIGN PAINTER,
AND VON DUTCHWAS A SIGN PAINTER.
BIG DADDY ED ROTH CAME ALONG,
AND ROBERT WILLIAMS ENDED UPBEING HIS ART DIRECTOR.
[LAVELLA]: YOU KNOW,THERE WOULD BE NO LOWBROW ART
CERTAINLYWITHOUT BIG DADDY ROTH,
AND DONNY DREW THISAND I PUT THE HALO ON IT,
AND I WAS, LIKE,HE NEEDS A HALO.
[WILLIAMS]: ROTH WAS REALLYTAKEN WITH ME,
'CAUSE I COULD DRAW, SEE,
AND HE JUST SAID "WELL,IF I KNEW YOU WERE AROUND,
I'D HAVE HUNTED YOU UP,"
SO HE MADE ME HIS ART DIRECTOR,
AND I WAS KIND OFTHE TROUBLESHOOTER AND WHATNOT.
I'D WORK ON HIS CARS WITH HIMAND WHATNOT,
AND THIS WAS 1965,
SO I STARTED MEETING
THE PSYCHEDELICROCK POSTER ARTISTS,
AND RICK GRIFFINAND STANLEY MOUSE.
[GIARLA]:THE ROCK POSTERS WERE HUGE
HERE IN SAN FRANCISCOIN THE '60s,
AND AGAIN, THERE WAS A LOTOF PSYCHEDELIA INVOLVED,
THEY WERE VERY POPPISHIN THE WAY THAT THERE WAS
A LOT OF BRIGHTVISUAL COLOURS USED.
NOW, YOU KNOW,
THERE'S THIS HUGE RESURGENCEIN ROCK POSTERS
THAT INCORPORATEBOTH LOWBROW IMAGERY
AND CLASSIC '60s PSYCHEDELIA.
IT'S HUGE NOW.
[♪♪♪]
[WILLIAMS]: PSYCHEDELICROCK POSTERS IN THEIR HEYDAY
WERE KNOWN ALL OVER EUROPEIN MUSEUMS,
BUT THEY REFUSED TO SHOW THEM
IN MUSEUMS IN L.A.,IN THE UNITED STATES.
WOULDN'T SHOW 'EM, SEE?
BECAUSE THAT'S NOT ACCEPTED,YOU KNOW?
THAT'S HIPPIES ON DRUGS,AND THAT WILL PASS.
[AUSGANG]: MY DAD INTRODUCED METO UNDERGROUND COMICS
WHEN I WAS, LIKE,IN MY LATE TEENS,
AND A LOT OF THAT WAS ZAP COMICSAND AND OTHER STUFF
THAT WAS COMING OUT OF
THE SAN FRANCISCOUNDERGROUND COMIC BOOK SCENE,
SO I KIND OF SAWWHAT THESE GUYS WERE DOING
WITH THE CARTOON LANGUAGEAND COMICS LANGUAGE,
AND THEN BRINGING IT UP
AND GETTING ALL OF THESESUBVERSIVE IDEAS ACROSS
LIKE THAT,
AND IT REALLY APPEALED TO ME.
[WILLIAMS]: 1967, ROBERT CRUMBENTERED THE PICTURE,
AND HE KIND OF WAS LIKETHE FIRESTORM
THAT GOT THE PSYCHEDELICROCK POSTER ARTISTS
TO START DOINGUNDERGROUND COMICS.
THAT WAS WELL ON ITS WAYBEFORE CRUMB CAME IN,
BUT CRUMB WASTHE IGNITION POINT,
AND WHEN I SAWMY FIRST ZAP COMIC,
I KNEW, WELL, THIS IS NOTLIKE COMMERCIAL ART,
BECAUSE YOU CAN DOAS YOU PLEASE,
BUT NOT ONLY THAT,
WE ALL HAD SOME CONNECTIONWITH THE EARLIER DRUG CULTURE
PRIOR TO THE VIETNAM WAR,
SO WE WERE JUST A BROTHERHOODIMMEDIATELY,
AND STARTED UNDERGROUND COMICS.
NOW, ONE OF THE GREATESTALTERNATIVE ARTISTS OF OUR TIME
THAT THESE MUSEUMSWOULD FIGHT FOR
IS ROBERT CRUMB, SEE?
THE CHICKENS ARE GOINGTO COME HOME TO ROOST,
APPARENTLY, YOU KNOW?
[♪♪♪]
[WILLIAMS]: SO ROTHWENT OUT OF BUSINESS IN 1970,
AND SO I HAD A STOCKOF OIL PAINTINGS,
AND I JUST STARTEDSELLING OIL PAINTINGS,
AND I'VE BEEN A PROFESSIONALOIL PAINTER SINCE 1970,
SO THERE'S STILLTHIS ENORMOUS ART WORLD
THAT DOESABSTRACT EXPRESSIONISM,
AND I DO THESE LURID PAINTINGS
AND NAKED WOMEN AND FANTASIESAND WHATNOT,
AND NO GALLERY WILL TAKE ME,YOU KNOW,
AND NO FOUNDATIONS,NO MUSEUMS...
I HAVE NO PEER GROUP.
AT SOME POINT,PEOPLE IN THE ART COMMUNITY
DOWN AT THE LAGUNA ART MUSEUM
SAW THE ADVANTAGE OF DOINGA THING
CALLED THE KUSTOM KULTURE SHOW.
[NASON]: IT FEATUREDWHAT WE CALL THE HOLY TRINITY,
AND THAT WOULD BEBIG DADDY ROTH, VON DUTCH,
AND ROBERT WILLIAMS,
BUT IT ALSO INCLUDEDA LOT OF THE OTHER ARTISTS
WHO WERE IMPORTANT,
LIKE THE PIZZ WAS IN THAT SHOW,
ANTHONY AUSGANG,
STANLEY MOUSE,
AND SANDOW BURK.
[♪♪♪]
IF YOU LOOK BACKON THE 20th CENTURY
AND HAD TO THINK OF THE ONE ICONTHAT BEST REPRESENTS IT,
I PERSONALLY THINK
IT WOULD BE SOME SORTOF CARTOON,
LIKE POSSIBLY, YOU KNOW,ALFRED E. NEWMAN'S FACE
OR MICKEY MOUSE,OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
[THE PIZZ]:IT WAS A CARTOON WORLD FOR ME.
YOU KNOW, ANY CARTOONTHAT WAS ON TV,
WE ALL WATCHED CARTOONS,
AND I WAS LOOKING ATSOME OLD MADs THE OTHER WEEK,
AND I REALIZEDHOW INGRAINED IT IS,
HOW EVERY FRAMEIS PACKED FULL OF STUFF.
THAT'S ONE THINGTHAT LOWBROW HAS
IS IT'S NARRATIVE.
IT'S ALWAYS A NARRATIVE.
THERE'S ALWAYSA NARRATIVE PUNCH.
SOMETHING'S GOING ON,
SOMETHING'S ABOUT TO HAPPEN,
OR SOMETHING'S JUST HAPPENED.
VERY RARELYDO YOU HAVE SOMETHING
THAT'S A STILLBORNAND JUST LAYS THERE.
THERE'S A LOT OF DYNAMICS.
THERE'S A LOT OF STUFF MOVING.
IT GOES RIGHT TO THE JUGULAR,
AND GOING BACKTO THE OLD MAD MAGAZINE CLAIM,
YOU KNOW,"HUMOUR IN A JUGULAR VEIN."
[WILLIAMS]:SO YOU'VE GOT THESE EMOTIONS,
ALL THESE ODD EMOTIONSOF ABSTRACT FEELING
THAT YOU JUST SAY"WELL, THAT'S HUMOUR."
SEE?
WELL, IF YOU HAVE TO JUSTSAY "HUMOUR," OKAY,
BUT IT'S GOING TO BESOME PRETTY DARK HUMOUR.
[♪♪♪]
[I, BRAINEATER]: I CAN REMEMBERBEING IN AMSTERDAM,
AND THE BIGGEST THING YOU SEEIS ALL THIS COWBOY CULTURE,
FROM POSTERS, THE SHOES,AND EVERYTHING LIKE THIS.
EUROPEANS CAN'T DO IT.
THEY'RE AN OLD LAND.
THEY'RE IN THE LAND OF DYSTOPIA.
IT'S ALWAYS BEEN LOOKINGFOR THE NEW ARCADIA.
IT'S ALWAYS BEEN LOOKINGFOR THIS NEW MAGIC LAND.
THIS IS THE MAGIC LAND.
THE WEST COAST.
IT SAYS "DO WHAT YOU WANNA.
"DON'T STOMP ON OTHERS TOO MUCH.
LIVE. PROSPER."ALMOST A STAR-TREKKY THING.
FROM STAR TREK TO TIKI,IT'S HERE.
[♪♪♪]
DURING THE 1950s AND EARLY '60s,
A LOT OF TIKI-THEMEDPOLYNESIAN RESTAURANTS
AND TAVERNS AND BARSWERE ACROSS THE U.S.
TRADER VIC'S,DON THE BEACHCOMBER,
AND A LOT OF IT CAME FROM
THE BOYS COMING BACKFROM THE PACIFIC
THAT WERE STATIONEDOUT THERE DURING WORLD WAR II,
THEY GREW TO LOVETHE POLYNESIAN DECOR
AND THESE TIKI IDOLS
THAT WERE KIND OF OMNIPRESENTTHROUGHOUT MOST OF THE PACIFIC,
BUT THERE'S ALSOTHIS WHOLE NEW SCHOOL OF, SAY,
THE NEWBROW OR LOWBROW ARTISTS
THAT ARE DRAWINGUPON THIS IMAGERY
AND USING IT QUITE A BITIN THEIR ART,
AND THERE'S BEEN SEVERALSUCCESSFUL TIKI ART SHOWS.
[12 MIDNITE]:THE WHOLE TIKI CULTURE
HAS THE SAME ORIGINSWHERE THE LOWBROW CULTURE IS,
IT'S BROUGHT BACKWITH THE SERVICEMEN,
THE SAME PEOPLETHAT BROUGHT BACK THE FREEDOM
THAT THEY FELTFROM FLYING JET PLANES
AND TOOK ITTO RIDING MOTORBIKES,
THE SAME PEOPLE, YOU KNOW,
MAYBE THEN WANTED THEIR OWNLITTLE BACKYARD TAHITI.
IT COULD BE THE WHOLE "GAUGUINOFF TO TAHITI" THING
WHERE WE'RE ALL FASCINATEDBY OTHER LANDS, OTHER WORLDS,
AND A BETTER LIFE,
A LAND OF SUNSHINEAND CARNAL DESIRES.
FOR ME, I WENT TO DISNEYLAND,AND I WAS, LIKE,
I WANT TO LIVE IN DISNEYLAND.
THE ENCHANTED TIKI ROOM,
WELL, I WANTED TO, YOU KNOW,
I WANTED TO LIVEIN THE TIKI ROOM,
SO WHEN I ACTUALLY GOT TO WORKWITH DISNEYLAND, YOU KNOW,
I WAS HONOUREDTO BE ABLE TO DO IT.
WE LOOK BACK, WE TIE BACKTHE TIKI, THE WEST COAST,
THE BAD BOY IMAGEIN SOME OF THIS,
THE CRAZED GIRLS,THE CRAZED MONSTERS...
IT WAS FREEDOM.
IT WAS A LAST CHANCE TO BE FREE,
AND RIGHT NOW,
IF WE DID WHATWE WERE SUPPOSED TO AS ARTISTS,
GOOD GOD, I'D HAVE TO, LIKE,PROBABLY CHEW CHUNKS OF WOOD,
SPIT THEM OUT ON THE FLOOR,
AND HAVE SOMEONE SIT IN IT,
AND WE CALL IT SOME GREATCONCEPTUAL FORM OF ART
THAT YOU'RE SUPPOSEDTO THINK ABOUT.
POOEY ON THAT.
I LIKE CONCEPTUAL ARTIN ITS CONCEPTION.
THE CONCEPTUALIST CREDOIS EXACTLY WHAT DUCHAMP SAID,
THE TIME WILL COMEWHEN AN ARTIST,
ALL HE HAS TO DO IS POINTTO SOMETHING AND PREDICATE,
THAT IS ART.
FOR FOUR DECADES,
YOU'VE GOT AN ENORMOUS AMOUNTOF ARTISTS
THAT HAVE GONETHROUGH ART SCHOOL
THAT CAN'T DRAW.ABSOLUTELY CANNOT DRAW.
AND TAKE PRIDE IN IT,
AND FEEL THAT PEOPLEWHO CAN DRAW ARE ILLUSTRATORS,
AND THEY CAN ALWAYSHIRE AN ILLUSTRATOR
TO DO THEIR WORKIF THEY NEED A DRAWING, SEE.
CONCEPTUALISM BROUGHTA WONDERFUL THING
TO THE PLAYING FIELD,
AND THAT IS INTELLIGENT THOUGHT,
BUT IT'S LIKE BEINGA GREAT COMPOSER
THAT CAN'T PLAY THE PIANO.
IN THE BEGINNING OF MANKIND,
THERE IS A PRIMAL REAL URGETO TELL A STORY.
IT'S SUCH A BASIC FACTOR,YOU KNOW,
THERE'S ALL THESEANCIENT CULTURES,
WE KNOW NOTHING ABOUT 'EM
EXCEPT THAT THEY LEFTCAVE PAINTINGS,
THAT THERE'S ART LEFTTHAT THESE PEOPLE WERE INTO.
SO THAT'S SO BASIC,
SO AS ART AND PEOPLEWENT ALONG SIDE BY SIDE
AND WE HAD VARIOUSCIVILIZATIONS,
THEY HAD DIFFERENTART STYLES AND STUFF,
IT'S A LIVING,BREATHING LANGUAGE
THAT HAS NOTHING TO DOWITH VERBAL COMMUNICATION.
IT'S ALL VISUAL,CEREBRAL CORTEX,
AND A LOT OF IT DEFIES LOGIC,
AND SOMEWHERE ALONG THE LINE,
ART CRAWLED UP ITS OWN ASSAND YOU NEEDED AN INTERPRETER,
AND IT TURNED INTOLIKE THE CHURCH
WHERE YOU NEEDED THE CLERGY
TO EXPLAIN THE HIGH TEXTSOF THE CHURCH,
WELL, YOU NEEDED THE CLERGY,THE ART CRITICS
TO EXPLAIN WHAT WAS BEINGPUT OUT IN THE CHURCH OF ART,
WHICH WOULD BE THE MUSEUMS.
I THINK THE PROBLEMWITH SOME FORMS OF MODERN ART
SUCH AS MINIMALISMAND CONCEPTUALISM
IS THAT IF THE AUDIENCE MEMBER
DOESN'T HAVESOME ART HISTORY TRAINING
OR SOME REFERENCE POINTS,
THEY'RE NOT ABLETO UNDERSTAND THE PIECE
WITHOUT READINGAN ARTIST'S STATEMENT,
'CAUSE THERE'S SO LITTLEIN THE WORK.
TO LOOKAT A JACKSON POLLACK PAINTING
FROM A LOWBROW STANDPOINT,
YOU'RE JUST LOOKINGAT THESE MAD SPLATTERS
THAT'S GOING ON.
THE HIGHBROW APPROACH TO ITIS THAT,
YOU KNOW,WHAT DO THESE DRIPS MEAN,
AND WHAT IS THIS ALL ABOUT?
THE THING THAT'S REPELLENTABOUT LOWBROW
IS THAT IT REALLYBLITZKRIEGS THE IDEA
THAT HIGH CULTURE REQUIRES
A CERTAIN LEVELOF INTELLIGENCE,
SOMETHING THAT'S LEARNED,
SO I THINK IT'SA FEAR OF THE SAVAGE,
YOU KNOW, IN A WEIRD WAY.
THE ENTIRE ESTABLISHED ART WORLDIS JOINED TOGETHER
FROM ART SCHOOLS
TO THE FOUNDATIONSTO THE MUSEUMS.
THEY'RE ALL INTERLINKEDWITH EACH OTHER, SYSTEMATICALLY,
TO HELP PROMOTE STYLESTHAT THEY EMBRACE.
THERE SHOULD BE20 DIFFERENT KINDS OF ART.
IT SHOULD BEAN OPEN PLAYING FIELD,
BUT IT ISN'T.
THERE'S A LOT OF ANDY WARHOLPOP ART
IN MUSEUMS ALL OVER THE PLACE,
BUT THERE'S... I DON'T THINKTHERE'S ANY LOWBROW
IN ANY PERMANENT COLLECTIONS.
[I, BRAINEATER]:WELL, I THINK WHAT HAPPENS
WITH THE HIGHBROW ART GALLERIES,
BASICALLY THEY'RE STAFFEDAND MANNED BY A GANG OF PEOPLE
THAT HAVE BEEN, QUOTE,I SUPPOSE, CRITICALLY TRAINED
AT THE UNIVERSITY, QUOTE,
TO HAVE THE CERTAIN JOBS
LIKE CURATORSAND STUFF LIKE THIS.
THEY'RE A CLOSED SHOP.
THE REST OF US HAVE BEENSHUT OUT FOR DECADES,
AND PROBABLY FOREVER,
SO WE HAD TO CREATEOUR OWN SCENE,
AND YOU MIGHT THINKTHAT AFTER 10, 20 YEARS,
YOU MIGHT SOMEHOW FLOWINTO THIS MAINSTREAM
AND BE ACCEPTED.
NOT SO.NOT AT ALL. NOT AT ALL.
AT ONE POINT, I TOOK MY SLIDESTO AN ART GALLERY,
AND THE DEALER SAID, YOU KNOW,
I'LL ONLY GIVE YOU A SHOWIF YOU'LL SLEEP WITH ME,
WHICH I DIDN'T DO,SO I DIDN'T GET THE SHOW,
AND ANOTHER TIME, THEY SAID,
YOU KNOW,WE'LL LOOK AT YOUR SLIDES
IF YOU'LL BRING EVERYTHINGFROM OUR TRUCK INSIDE,
SO BASICALLY TREATING MELIKE SHIT
BECAUSE I WAS BRINGING INTHIS WORK
THAT THEY THOUGHT WAS A JOKE.
AND THEN THIS LITTLE SCRUFFYMONGREL ART TYPE
CAME BACK OUT OF THE WOODWORK
AND PEOPLE STARTEDPAYING ATTENTION TO IT.
I THINK THAT'S WHY A LOT OF ITIS POO-POOED FROM, YOU KNOW,
THE ART COGNOSCENTIAND THEIR AVATARS IN NEW YORK,
BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT NEEDEDANYMORE TO EXPLAIN SHIT,
YOU KNOW?
YOU DON'T HAVE TO.
IT'S LIKE "THEY GET IT,SO WHAT'S MY JOB HERE?
WHAT'S MY FUNCTION?"
SO THEY'RE HANGING ONTO THEIR LAST THREADS.
[AUSGANG]: THIS IS REAL.
THIS IS A BATTLE,
AND I THINK IF YOU LOOK ATA ROY LICHTENSTEIN PAINTING,
YOU LOOK AT IT 10, 15 YEARS AGO,
I THINK IT STILL CARRIEDTHIS INCREDIBLE WEIGHT.
LOWBROW ART HAS TAKENTHAT CARTOON LANGUAGE
AND SAID SOME INCREDIBLESTATEMENTS WITH IT
THAT MAKE HIM LOOK LIKE...TO ME, IT DOESN'T WORK ANYMORE.
THAT'S WHAT THEY'RE AFRAID OF,IS THAT LOWBROW CAN ACTUALLY...
HAS THE ABILITY TO ERASEEARLIER CULTURAL STATEMENTS.
IT'S POWERFUL,AND PEOPLE ARE SCARED OF THAT.
THE POWERS THAT BE IN THAT WORLDMAY DECIDE ONE DAY
THAT THIS ISAN IMPORTANT ART MOVEMENT
AND IT'S SOMETHING
THAT THEY NEEDTO TAKE SERIOUSLY.
THERE HAS BEEN A REAL EMERGENCEOF WOMEN ARTISTS,
WHO HAVEN'T SUPERSEDEDTHE MALE ARTISTS,
BUT WHO HAVE DEFINITELYMADE THEIR PRESENCE FELT.
ONCE THEY SAY "BOYS ONLY,"IT REALLY DOES SOMETHING TO ME.
[PETRUCCI]:I THINK THAT THERE ARE THINGS
IN THE POP CULTURE
THAT WOMEN CAN REFERENCEAND TAKE AS THEIR OWN,
AND A LOT OF THATDOES HAVE TO DO
WITH SEXUALLY DRIVEN IMAGERY.
WE WERE SEEING MENUSING THE KIND OF IMAGERY
THAT WE WERE, LIKE, WELL,THAT'S A PAINTING OF A WOMAN,
AND I'M A WOMAN,
AND I THINK I'M BETTER QUALIFIEDTO PAINT A WOMAN THAN YOU ARE,
AND I THINK I CAN PROBABLY PAINTA BETTER WOMAN THAN YOU CAN,
AND I'M GOING TO TRY,
AND THEN THERE'S A CERTAINACCEPTANCE IN THAT, TOO.
I THINK IT'S BEEN REALLY GREATFOR WOMEN.
I THINK THE WHOLE LOWBROW THINGIS PROBABLY MORE OPEN TO WOMEN
THAN ALMOST ANY ART MOVEMENTIN HISTORY SO FAR.
THE INTERNET,IT'S OPENED UP A LOT OF DOORS.
PEOPLE THAT PREVIOUSLY COULDFIND OUT ABOUT ART
NOW HAVE GREATER ACCESSTO ALL KINDS OF ART,
AND AS A RESULT,
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO GO MORETOWARDS WHAT THEY LIKE
AND THEIR AESTHETIC
AS OPPOSED TO GOING WITH ARTTHAT PEOPLE TELL THEM IS GOOD.
WITH THE INTERNET,
THAT JUST BROUGHT THE AWARENESSTO A POINT
WHERE PEOPLE STARTED MAKING ITHAPPEN IN THEIR CITIES,
YOU KNOW,
FROM PHILADELPHIA TO CHICAGOTO NEW YORK.
ALL OF A SUDDEN,WE'RE NO LONGER BEING STOPPED
GETTING TO THE PEOPLE
WHO ACTUALLYMIGHT REALLY ENJOY OUR WORK.
[NAILOR]: SO I THINK CURATORS
ARE GOING TO PLAYA LESS IMPORTANT ROLE,
AS WILL GALLERY OWNERS,
IN DETERMINING THE FUTUREOF WHAT PEOPLE PURCHASE,
AND PEOPLE WILL MAKE BETTERSINGLE-MINDED DECISIONS
BASED ON WHAT THEY LIKE.
ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT THINGS
IS THE ARTIST'SAUDIENCE INTERACTION,
AND I'M TOTALLY GRATEFUL
THAT PEOPLE ARE INTERESTEDIN MY WORK.
[PRESSMAN]:IN THE MUSIC BUSINESS,
YOU CAN'T GO OUT
AND MEET ALL YOUR FAVOURITEMUSICIANS, PARTICULARLY,
BUT IN LOWBROW ART,
YOU CAN ACTUALLYSEE ALL THE ARTISTS AT ART SHOWS
AND TALK TO THEM,AND GET TO KNOW THEM A LITTLE.
IT ADDS A LOT TO THE ACTUAL ART,
KNOWING WHAT KIND OF PEOPLETHEY ARE.
[AUSGANG]: TO ME, IT'SA CAMARADERIE OF SUBVERSION,
REALLY,
AND WE'RE TRYINGTO SUBVERT SOMETHING,
WHETHER ONE IS AN ARTIST
OR ONE IS A MEMBEROF AN AUDIENCE.
YOU'RE STILL ENGAGED IN THIS,LIKE, ALMOST A MILITARY ACTION
TO GET THIS MESSAGE OUT THERE.
[♪♪♪]
NEW YORKAFTER THE SECOND WORLD WAR
INHERITEDTHE CORONET OF FINE ART
FROM EUROPE,AND ESPECIALLY FRANCE,
AND THIS WAS BASICALLY DUETO ABSTRACT EXPRESSIONISTS, SEE?
THE FRESH, NEW CAPITALOF THE WORLD IS NEW YORK.
NEW YORK HAS ALWAYSPRIDED ITSELF ON SOPHISTICATION,
YOU KNOW, WHICH MEANSCONSTIPATION.
LOS ANGELES AND SAN FRANCISCO
HAVE THE QUALITYOF BEING ON THE PACIFIC RIM
AND BEING THOUSANDS OF MILESAWAY FROM NEW YORK
AND OWING ALMOST NOTHINGTO EUROPE.
YOU'VE GOT ALL THESESUBCULTURAL ART FORMS
THAT ARE JUST CONTINUALLYBLOSSOMING, YOU KNOW?
YOU'VE GOT HOT RODS AND BIKERSAND SURFING AND SKATEBOARDS
AND TATTOOS AND COMIC BOOKSAND ESPECIALLY HOLLYWOOD
AND ALL THE EPHEMERATHAT SLIPPED OFF HOLLYWOOD,
AND IT'S ALL NEW AND EXCITING,
AND IT'S ALL INDIRECTLYOR DIRECTLY RELATED TO ART.
THE WEST COAST IS ALWAYS WHERETHE, LET'S SAY FREE-THINKERS,
HAVE EITHER COME FROMOR GONE TO.
CALIFORNIA IS WHERE PEOPLEARE OPEN TO NEW THINGS.
[♪♪♪]
[WILLIAMS]: IN THE LATE '70s,
AN INTERESTING PHENOMENONHAPPENED,
THE SPONTANEOUS GENERATIONOF PUNK ROCK.
AS NIHILISTIC AS IT WAS,
THE VAST MAJORITYIF NOT ALL PUNK ROCK MUSICIANS
HAD FINE ARTS BACKGROUNDS.
SO YOU HAD THIS YOUNG GENERATIONOF BOHEMIANS
IN THIS PUNK ROCK WORLD.
AT A CERTAIN POINT
UNTIL THE ART BEGANTO CARVE AN IDENTITY OF ITS OWN,
I THINK IT WAS ANCILLARYTO MUSIC.
IT WASN'T EVEN CALLED"LOWBROW ART."
[I, BRAINEATER]: IT WAS JUST,LIKE, DO IT YOURSELF.
YOU DON'T NEED PERMISSIONFOR ANYTHING, JUST DO IT,
AND THAT'SWHAT OUR GANG STARTED DOING,
AND THAT'SHOW WE CREATED THE SCENE,
BUT IT WAS REALLY CALLED
"IF YOU WANT TO DO IT,YOU DO IT YOURSELF,
"AND IF YOU'RE WAITINGFOR SOMEONE TO LET YOU DO IT,
IT AIN'T GONNA HAPPEN."
[AUSGANG]:IN RETROSPECT I REALIZE
THAT ONE OFTHE MOST IMPORTANT WAYS
THAT LOWBROW ARTGOT BROADCAST TO PEOPLE
WAS THROUGH FLYERSAND CD COVERS, RECORD COVERS,
AND STUFF LIKE THAT.
WELL, I KNOW A LOT OF ARTISTSWHO KEPT FOOD ON THEIR TABLE
BY DOING RECORD COVERSAND FLYERS AND STUFF,
SO IN THAT SENSE, YOU KNOW,IT WAS IMPORTANT.
YEAH, I WAS IN BANDS.
PART OF THE REASONI HAVE THE NAME "SHAG"
IS BECAUSE I DIDN'T WANT
TO SIGN MY OWN NAMEON THE RECORD COVERS,
YOU KNOW, I THOUGHTIT WOULD SEEM UNPROFESSIONAL
IF PEOPLE LOOKED AT THE RECORDAND THEY SAID
"HEY, THE GUITAR PLAYERDID THE ALBUM COVER!"
SO I HAD TO COME UPWITH A PSEUDONYM,
AND THAT'S WHERE "SHAG"CAME FROM.
[AUSGANG]:AND YOU DO A PAINTING
AND IT GOES IN A GALLERY,
HOW MANY PEOPLEARE GOING TO SEE IT, RIGHT?
BUT WITH A CD OR A RECORD COVER,IT'S...
IT JUST GOESIN SO MANY DIFFERENT PLACES
THAT ARE UNFORESEEN.
AND THEN SOMETHING LIKE A BANDLIKE THE OFFSPRING,
YOU KNOW, WHEN THEY MADE IT,
THEY HIRED FRANK KOZIKTO DO A RECORD COVER.
THAT RECORD SHIPPEDTEN TIMES PLATINUM,
10 MILLION PEOPLE HAVE A CDWITH KOZIK ART.
I'M MORE KNOWN TO PEOPLEIN BANDS
THAN TO JOE ON THE STREET,YOU KNOW?
DOING THE JOBS FOR METALLICA,
I MEAN, WERE DEFINITELY GOOD.
I'M STILL DOING SOME WORKFOR THEM HERE AND THERE.
THEY'RE REALLY GOOD GUYS,YOU KNOW,
THEY BUY A LOT OF STUFF OFF ME,
YOU KNOW, THEY BUY PAINTINGS.
IT'S NOT ALL METALLICA STUFF.
THEY BUY DIRTY DONNY ART.
[I, BRAINEATER]:SURE, I'M GETTING PUBLICITY
AND KNOWN THAT WAY,
AND SKINNY PUPPY STUFF TOO,YOU KNOW.
I GUESS THE OLD STORY GOES,YOU'VE GOT TO REALIZE
THERE'S MORE THAN ONE WAYTO SKIN A CAT,
AND THE SAME GOESFOR THE ART THING.
IF YOU'RE GOING TO WORRY
ABOUT THOSE ART GALLERIESOUT THERE
THAT ARE GOING TO STICKTHEIR NOSES UP IN THE AIR
WHEN YOU SHOW THEMWHAT YOU'VE GOT,
YOU'RE DOOMED.
IN VANCOUVER IN THE 1980s,
THERE WAS KIND OFA PARALLEL SCENE
AS TO WHAT WAS GOING ONIN CALIFORNIA,
WITH THE D.I.Y.UNDERGROUND ART SCENE,
AND THE ESTABLISHEDGALLERIES
WEREN'T REALLY INTERESTEDIN WHAT WE WERE DOING,
SO THE ARTISTS BASICALLYHAD TO DO IT THEMSELVES.
I WAS PAINTINGIN MY KITCHEN  ONE DAY,
AND MY FRIEND, 12 MIDNITE,CAME OVER AND SAID
"OH, VICKI, I DIDN'T KNOWYOU WERE A PAINTER.
I DIDN'T KNOWYOU WERE AN ARTIST,"
AND I SAID, "WELL, I'M NOT."
AND HE SAID,"OH, WELL, I THINK YOU ARE,"
SO WE'VE GOT A SHOWCOMING UP NEXT MONTH
AND I'M GOING TO BE IN IT.
I FIRST GOT INTO ARTAND THE LOCAL SCENE IN VANCOUVER
THROUGH THE BRAINEATERS,
PUNK ROCK AND ARTIST GROUP,THE BRAINEATERS,
AND THEY WERE DOING PERFORMANCEAS WELL AS ART SHOWS,
SO THAT KIND OF PIQUEDMY INTEREST IN THE ART SCENE.
THERE'S NEVER BEENANY TRADITIONAL GALLERIES
IN THIS CITY
THAT ARE REALLYFOR PEOPLE LIKE US.
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IS SOMEONEWOULD GET IN CHARGE
OF SOMETHING LIKE THIS ONE
THAT WAS SUPPOSED TO BE
EMILY CARR'SSTUDENT GALLERY THING
CALLED THE HELEN PITT.
WE'D SQUEEZE OURSELVES INBETWEEN THE ART SCHOOL STUDENTS,
AND WE'D HAVE OUR SHOWS THEREWHEN WE COULD.
[STEEN]:AND THEN THE SMASH GALLERY
WAS DOING SOME SHOWS.
I WAS ASKED TO BEIN THE FIRST SHOW.
IT WAS A GROUP SHOW.
I KIND OF FELL INTO ITACCIDENTALLY
AND FOUND A PLACE
THAT WAS JUST TOO BIGTO BE JUST MY STUDIO.
THEY WERE SHOWINGA LOT OF COMIC BOOK ARTISTS
AND LOWBROW ARTISTS,
YOU KNOW, THEY HAD ALREADY SORTOF HOOKED INTO THAT WHOLE SCENE,
ALTHOUGH AT THAT TIME,IT WASN'T CLASSIFIED AS LOWBROW.
[12 MIDNITE]:WELL, THE MOST FAMOUS ARTISTS
WOULD HAVE PROBABLY BEEN THOSEINVOLVED IN THE MISFIT LIT SHOW.
RALPH STEADMAN,DAVID SANDLIN,
DAN CLOWES, DAVID BOSWELLTHAT DOES REID FLEMING...
JUST EVERYBODY THAT WAS LINKEDWITH FANTAGRAPHICS AT THE TIME.
PEOPLE SAW COMIC BOOK PANELSOR ALBUMS COVERS, WHATEVER,
THE ORIGINAL ART ON THE WALLSAS ART.
IT'S AFTER THATWHERE WE FORMED THE POP TARTS,
AND SO WE STARTEDDOING REGULAR SHOWS ALSO.
[STEEN]: ZULU RECORDS DECIDED
TO LET US USE THE SPACEIN THE BACK OF THE STORE
TO HAVE SOME SHOWSAND TO SET UP SHOP.
[VICKI M]: BECAUSEWE WERE CALLED THE POP TARTS,
WE DECIDED TO CALL ITTART GALLERY.
WE HAD ABOUT 20-ODD SHOWS
OVER THE YEAR AND A HALFTHAT WE WERE THERE,
AND WE HAD A ROSTEROF 150 ARTISTS.
A LOT OF THEMWERE LOCAL AND UP AND COMERS,
BUT WE ALSO HADQUITE A FEW ARTISTS
FROM THE STATES.
IT WAS A GREAT PLACETO SHOW ART,
AND WE INTRODUCEDA LOT OF YOUNG PEOPLE
WHO WERE PROBABLY INTIMIDATED
BY GOING INTO SOME OFTHE COMMERCIAL GALLERIES,
THEY WOULD COME INAND COME TO OUR SHOWS
AND DRINK BEER AND BUY ARTAT VERY REASONABLE PRICES,
AND, YOU KNOW, THAT WASPART OF OUR WHOLE DEAL.
WE WANTED TO, YOU KNOW,
BE ACCESSIBLETO JUST THE REGULAR PERSON.
[STEEN]: THROUGH CONNECTIONSTO A GALLERY IN SEATTLE,
ROQ LA RUE,
WE MET LISA PETRUCCI,
AND WE ALSO KNEWSHERRI CULLISON.
SHERRI GAVE US A CALLAND ASKED US FOR AN INTERVIEW
FOR THIS BOOK THAT SHE WAS DOINGON THE LADIES OF LOWBROW.
WE DIDN'T EXPECT ITEXACTLY TO COME OUT,
AND WE ALSO DIDN'T EXPECT ITTO BE AS BEAUTIFUL AS IT WAS.
[VICKI M]:THERE WAS A LOT OF SHOWS
THAT WERE ASSOCIATEDWITH THE BOOK.
THERE WAS VANCOUVER, TORONTO,WE HAD TWO SHOWS IN L.A.,
UM, BUT IT ALSO KIND OFSNOWBALLED FROM THERE,
AND WE ENDED UP DOING
THE SCI-FI WESTERN SHOWIN SAN FRANCISCO,
WHICH WAS A REALLY IMPORTANTSHOW TO BE IN.
THERE WAS A LOT OF ARTISTSFROM ALL OVER THE STATES,
THEY PUT OUT A CATALOGUE,
IT'S PUBLISHED BY LAST GASPIN SAN FRANCISCO.
I THINK THE BOOKWAS A REAL TURNING POINT.
AFTER THAT, WE WERE INCLUDEDIN MANY GROUP SHOWS.
ROQ LA RUE, COPRO NASON,
LA LUZ DE JESUS GALLERY,
C-POP GALLERY IN DETROIT,
SHOOTING GALLERYIN SAN FRANCISCO,
FUSE GALLERY IN NEW YORK ...
WE HAVE SOME SHOWS COMING UPON THE EAST COAST THIS YEAR,
CHICAGO, NEW YORK, AND MONTREAL,
SO THAT'S PRETTY EXCITING.
[12 MIDNITE]: FELLOW ARTISTSLIKE HOLLY AND NICOLE STEEN,
VICKI MURDOCH AND I
DECIDED THAT IT WOULD BE GREAT
IF WE COULD GO
AND TAKE A SHOW OF ARTWORKTO THE STATES.
[STEEN]:BASICALLY GOT IN THE IMPALA
WITH A BUNCH OF PAINTINGS
AND WENT DOWN TO AUSTIN,
AND FROM THERE WE WENTTO LA LUZ DE JESUS
IN CALIFORNIA, IN LOS ANGELES,
AND THEN WE WENT ON TO FRESNO,
SO WE DID, LIKE,A THREE-CITY TOUR.
[12 MIDNITE]:WE'RE NOT AMERICANS,
BUT WE HAVE SIMILARITIESWITH AMERICA,
OUR BROTHERS AND SISTERSTO THE SOUTH.
WE ALSO HAVEDIFFERENT POLITICAL VIEWS,
AND I THINK THATTHAT WAS SHOWN IN THE SHOW.
DIFFERENT AESTHETIC IDEALS,AND DIFFERENT POLITICAL VIEWS.
THREE ENGINES LATER, HERE I AM.
[VICKI M]: THE SUMMER OF 2003,
12 MIDNITE OPENEDTHE NEW TINY GALLERY
IN THE HEART OF CHINATOWNIN VANCOUVER.
IT'S PROBABLY THE SMALLESTART GALLERY IN THE WORLD.
BASICALLY, AS BIGAS YOUR BEDROOM PROBABLY IS.
BUT IT'S A GALLERY,AND HE HAS SHOWS THERE,
AND PEOPLE BUY THERE,AND IT HAPPENS THERE,
AND THAT'S WHAT'S IMPORTANT,IT'S HAPPENING AND TAKING PLACE.
NEW TINY IS TINY,BUT WE'VE HAD SOME GREAT SHOWS.
WORK FROM EVERYONE FROM,YOU KNOW,
COOP AND KOZIKAND KALYNN CAMPBELL,
MANWOMAN, DAVE OSTREM,NICOLE STEEN, HOLLY ANDERSON,
ANDREA TUCKER, PILAR...
WE'VE GOT THE BRAINEATER.
JUST EVERYBODY.
WE'VE SHOWNPRETTY MUCH EVERYBODY.
[DIRTY DONNY]:THERE'S A LOT OF GOOD ARTISTS
COMING OUT OF CANADA.
THERE'S A LOT OF SHOWSGOING ON THERE.
YOU'VE GOT GUYSLIKE DARREN MARINUK,
THERE'S GUYS LIKE DRAZENFROM TORONTO,
WHO'S JUST DONEA LOT OF ROCK AND ROLL ART,
ALBUM COVERS, POSTERS,
PAT HAMOU,THE GUY'S DONE, LIKE,
THOUSANDS OF POSTERSFOR MONTREAL
FROM THE '80sALL THE WAY UP TILL NOW.
THERE'S DAVE COOPER FROM OTTAWA,WHO'S BLOWING UP.
HIS STUFF'S EVERYWHERE.
U.S., CANADA, JUST EVERYWHERE.
BUT YEAH, CANADA'S ART SCENEIS REALLY GOOD,
AND I THINK IT GETS OVERLOOKED.
[VICKI M]: WE JUST DON'T HAVETHE POPULATION HERE
TO SUPPORT
ALL THE CREATIVE PEOPLETHAT WE HAVE,
AND PEOPLE NEEDTO GO TO THE STATES
TO GET THE RECOGNITION AND FAME.
[GIARLA]:THIS WHOLE LOWBROW MOVEMENT
REALLY KIND OF TOOK SPARKAND BLEW UP
DUE TO THE FACT THAT I THINK,
REALLY, BILLY SHIRE OPENED UPTHE LUZ DE JESUS GALLERY
ABOVE THE SOAP PLANT ON MELROSE,
AND STARTED SHOWINGTHESE ARTISTS
THAT HE FELT WAS FINE ART.
IT WASN'T LOWBROW,THIS WAS FINE ART,
AND IT DID DESERVE WHITE WALLS.
[SHIRE]: 1986.
IT STARTED TOTALLY BY ACCIDENT.
A LOT OF IT IS AN OUTGROWTHOF THE STORES THAT I DO,
WACKO AND SOAP PLANT,
WHICH ARE ALLKIND OF POP CULTURE RELATED.
I STARTED DOING DAY OF THE DEAD
AND ARTISTS THAT WERE DOINGKIND OF A POP FOLK ART...
IT SORT OF JUST KIND OFKEPT ON ROLLING ON
TO DIFFERENT THINGS
WHERE I HAD A LOT OF FRIENDSTHAT WERE ARTISTS,
AND THEY WEREN'T BEING SHOWN,
PEOPLE LIKE ROBERT WILLIAMS
AND GARY PANTER,
AND WE JUST KEPT ON GOING.
[♪♪♪]
I THINK JUXTAPOZ STARTEDPARTIALLY OUT OF NECESSITY,
BECAUSE PEOPLE
CONVENTIONALLY ASSOCIATEGOOD ART
WITH THE EAST COAST,ESPECIALLY NEW YORK CITY,
AND ROBERT WILLIAMS,
WHO WAS A PAINTERBASED IN CALIFORNIA,
FELT THAT THERE WASSORT OF A DEARTH OF RECOGNITION
FOR ARTWORK ON THE WEST COAST.
IT TARGETS A VERY SPECIFICKIND OF ARTWORK
THAT OTHER MAGAZINES IN THE PAST
MAY HAVE FOUNDTO BE TOO UNTRADITIONAL,
TOO CONTROVERSIAL,
TOO KIND OF IN YOUR FACEAND GRAPHIC,
BUT THAT THERE IS STILLA HUGE FAN BASE FOR.
[SAMARAS]:I GET MAIL FROM PEOPLE
IN FAR-FLUNG PARTSOF THE COUNTRY AND THE WORLD
WHO WOULD HAVE NO OTHER ACCESS
TO THE FACT THAT THIS STUFFIS GOING ON
IF JUXTAPOZ DIDN'T EXIST.
IT'S KIND OF THIS IRONIC COMEDY
WHERE, LIKE, I CAN SIT DOWNAT A TATTOO SHOW OR BOOK SIGNING
AND EVERYBODY KNOWS ME.
I GET STOPPED BY PEOPLEON THE STREET.
THEY'VE SEEN ME ON TV.
"HEY, I SAW YOUON MONSTER GARAGE!"
DIFFERENT STATES,DIFFERENT COUNTRIES.
I'VE WALKED DOWNTHE GINZA DISTRICT IN JAPAN,
AND I'VE HEARD MY NAME WHISPEREDAS I WALKED BY.
I WAS LIKE THE SECOND COMING.
SO AS FAR AS BEING KNOWN,INFAMOUS, WHATEVER,
IT'S INTERNATIONAL,IT'S HUGE, YOU KNOW,
BUT THAT AND 50 CENTSWILL GET ME A CUP OF COFFEE.
[SHIRE]: PEOPLE ASK MEALL THE TIME, YOU KNOW,
"WELL, YOU KNOW, IS IT GOINGTO BE WORTH MORE IN VALUE?"
AND I DON'T REALLY EVEN WANTTO TALK TO PEOPLE LIKE THAT.
OBVIOUSLY, SOME OF THE PEOPLETHAT I'VE SHOWN, YOU KNOW,
AND, YOU KNOW, BOUGHT WORK FROM,
HAS INCREASED10, 20, 30, 40 TIMES.
I WENT TO A SHOW IN 1981.
THE PAINTINGS WERE $1,400FOR BIG PAINTINGS.
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND,
THE GREATEST MASTERPIECESTHAT ARE COMING OUT
ARE COMING OUT RIGHT NOW,
AND PEOPLE ARE PAYING UP TO,YOU KNOW,
HALF A MILLION DOLLARSFOR A PAINTING.
I MEAN, MARK RYDEN JUST HADA PAINTING AT A MUSEUM
THAT WENT FOR, YOU KNOW,HALF A MILLION DOLLARS.
THAT COULD PROVETO BE A GREAT DEAL,
'CAUSE SALVADOR DALIIN THE LATE '50s,
HE'D SELL A PAINTING FOR $3,000,
AND THEN BY THE MID '60s,
THEY WERE GOING FOR, YOU KNOW,MILLIONS OF DOLLARS,
SO I THINK IF PEOPLE ARE PAYINGHALF A MILLION DOLLARS
FOR A PAINTING NOW,
FOR, SAY, A MARK RYDEN PAINTING,
MAYBE THEY'LL BE WORTHFIVE MILLION DOLLARS
IN A COUPLE OF YEARS.
YOU TAKE ARTISTS LIKEMARK RYDEN, SHAG, TIM BISKUP,
A LOT OF THE GREAT ARTISTSFROM CANADA AS WELL AS THE U.S.,
THE GROWTH IN VALUEOF THE PAINTINGS
HAS BEEN PHENOMENAL.
I AM NOW WHERE I'M AT THE SECONDOR THIRD BIGGEST GALLERY
IN NEW YORK,
TONY SHAFRAZI, SEE,
AND I'VE ACTUALLY STEPPEDINTO THE BLUE CHIP WORLD,
BUT I'M AT THE VERY BOTTOMOF THE LADDER, SEE,
WHICH IS PROBABLY BEST.
I'VE GONE FROMTHE TOP OF THE BOTTOM
TO THE BOTTOM OF THE TOP, SEE?
20 YEARS AGO,
ROBERT WILLIAMS COULDN'TBEG ANYONE TO SHOW HIS ARTWORK,
AND NOW, I'VE GOT TO BEG HIMTO SHOW,
AND SO DO
A LOT OF OTHER GALLERIESAROUND THE WORLD
THAT WANT TO SHOW HIM.
NOW IT'S NOT EVEN REALLYCONSIDERED LOWBROW AS MUCH.
OVER THE LAST 10 YEARS,
IT'S GONE THROUGHA LOT OF CHANGES,
BUT REALLYOVER THE LAST THREE YEARS,
IT'S GONE THROUGHAN AMAZING RENAISSANCE,
TO THE POINT WHERE NOW
THERE'S MAYBE A THOUSAND ARTISTSTHAT ARE DOING THIS KIND OF ART,
AND THERE'S TONS OF GALLERIESALL OVER THE COUNTRY.
I'VE HEARD STORIESOF PEOPLE COMING BACK
SAYING THEY SAW MY STUFFHANGING AT SOMEBODY'S RICH PLACE
IN NEW YORK.
WE WERE JUST LEAVING A PARTYSOMEWHERE
AND I LOOKED IN SOMEONE'S WINDOWIN THE STREET ACROSS TOWN THERE,
AND THERE WERE PAINTINGSI'D DONE BACK IN THE '70s
HANGING ON THEIR WALL.
I HEARD ONCE SOMEBODY SAIDTHEY WERE ALL THE WAY IN AFRICA,
AND ALL OF A SUDDEN THEY GO"OH, MY GOD.
IT'S ONEOF CUMMINGS'S T-SHIRTS."
JAPAN, THEY LOVE IT.
EUROPE LOVES IT,AND THEY GET IT.
THEY LIKE LOOKINGAT OUR OLD ADS.
THEY LIKE LISTENINGTO OUR OLD BANDS.
THEY LIKE OUR OLD CARS.
JAZZ HAD TO BE EXPORTEDAND THEN COME BACK
BEFORE IT GOT REALLY BIGAND RESPECTED.
ROCK AND ROLLWAS THE SAME THING.
IT HAD TO GO OVER TO ENGLANDAND THEN COME BACK.
[GIARLA]:FOR THE EVOLUTION OF LOWBROW
TO GET TO THE POINTWHERE IT IS TODAY,
AND NOW IT'S CALLEDPOP SURREALISM
AND SOME OTHER TERMS,
AND WE'RE JUST NOW STARTING
TO SEE GALLERIESIN NEW YORK CITY
TAKE IT SERIOUSLY,
AND I THINKIT'S JUST GOING TO BLOW UP.
[WILLIAMS]: A LARGE,LARGE NUMBER OF YOUNG PEOPLE
FOOL THEMSELVESINTO THINKING THEY'RE ARTISTS
AND THEY'D JUST RATHERLIVE THE ARTISTIC LIFE,
BUT IF YOU HAVE A COMPULSIONTO DO IT
AND YOU HAVE TO DO IT,
THE ART WILL TAKE CARE OF YOU.
[AUSGANG]: ONE OF MY FUNCTIONSIS TO INSPIRE YOUNGER ARTISTS
AND SAY "LOOK, YOU KNOW,HEY, MAN, I'M 46,
I'M GOING TO BE PUSHING 50,BUT I'M STILL IN IT,"
AND ONE OF MY FAVOURITE THINGSWHEN I MEET PEOPLE
IS TO SAY"ARE YOU IN THIS FOR LIFE?
BECAUSE THIS IS...THIS IS REAL, YOU KNOW?"
IT'S ESSENTIALLYCULTURAL WARFARE, IN A WAY.
FIVE YEARS AGO, 10 YEARS AGO,20 YEARS AGO,
IF YOU TOLD MEWHERE I WAS GOING TO BE,
YOU KNOW, AT THIS POINT,
I WOULDN'T HAVE BELIEVED IT,YOU KNOW?
YOU'LL BE SITTINGIN A BIG HOUSE.
YOU'LL BE HAVING FILM CREWSOVER TO YOUR HOUSE ALL THE TIME.
MAGAZINES WILL SEEK, YOU KNOW,YOUR EACH AND EVERY WORD,
YOU'LL BE A CULTURAL ICONFROM SHORE TO SHORE, YOU KNOW,
AND YOU'LL NOT HAVETO GO TO A JOB AGAIN.
I WOULD HAVE NEVER THOUGHTTHAT WOULD HAPPEN.
I LOVE DOING THE MUSICWHEN I GET TO DO THAT.
THERE'S SOMETHINGABOUT BEING ON STAGE.
THERE AIN'T NOTHING ELSELIKE IT.
SOMETIMES YOU DON'T EVENGET PAID WHEN YOU PLAY,
BUT STILL, THE AUDIENCEPAYS YOU TENFOLD,
THE THRILL YOU GET.
WHEN I GET TO PAINT SOMETHING,THE THRILL I GET...
SPENT A LIFETIMESTUDYING WHAT I LOVE TO DO,
AND I GOT A LIFETIME LEFTTO FINISH OFF WHAT I LOVE TO DO,
AND IF THAT AIN'T GOOD ENOUGH,I DON'T KNOW WHAT IS.
I LOVE COMING TO WORK EVERY DAY,
'CAUSE I GET TO WORKIN MY OWN ART GALLERY.
YOU KNOW, EVER SINCEMY FIRST JUXTAPOZ,
I'VE LOVED THIS ARTWORKAND EVERYTHING ABOUT IT,
AND I'M PRETTY LUCKYTO BE ABLE TO DO THIS,
SO I'M ENJOYINGEVERY MINUTE OF THIS.
[SAMARAS]: I THINK VAN GOGHDID THIS HUGE DISSERVICE
TO ARTISTS EVERYWHERE
BY PORTRAYING THIS IDEATHAT YOU HAVE TO BE INSANE,
IMPOVERISHED,
AND, YOU KNOW, UTTERLY DEJECTEDTO HAVE A CREATIVE IMPULSE,
AND I THINK THAT YOU CAN HAVEA WELLSPRING OF CREATIVITY
COME FROM A VERY POSITIVE PLACEIN YOUR LIFE.
AS FAR AS I'M CONCERNED,
IT REALLY DOESN'T MATTERWHAT IT'S CALLED.
I MEAN, PEOPLE HAVE COINEDTHE PHRASE "POP SURREALISM"
AND "LOWBROW..."
THE ONLY WAY I COULD REALLYCOMPARE IT
IS THINKING ABOUT WHAT WARHOLWAS DOING IN THE '60s
AND THE SCENETHAT WAS AROUND IT,
WITH ALL THOSE DIFFERENT PEOPLE
AND ALL THESEDIFFERENT CHARACTERS.
IN 20 YEARS,IT'S GOING TO BE HUGE,
AND PEOPLE ARE GOING TO THINKIT WAS THIS GREAT THING,
AND THEY'RE GOING TO SAY
"MY GOD, I WISH I WOULD HAVEBEEN INVOLVED WITH IT MORE."
[CULLISON]: THE FACT THATTHERE ARE PEOPLE OUT THERE
ABLE TO MAKE A LIVINGAND KEEP GOING WITH IT
AND ABLE TO DOSO MUCH WITH THEIR LIVES
AND LIVE FREELY AND TRAVEL
AND DO ALL THE THINGSTHAT THEY CAN DO
OFF OF THAT ART...
IT IS ACCEPTED, I THINK.
[♪♪♪]